Functional Programming
======================

We're going to take a short break now to talk about a style of programming you
may have heard of: [functional programming][].

If you've programmed in languages like Python, Ruby or Javascript, or
*especially* Lisp, Scheme, Clojure or Haskell, you're probably familiar with the
idea of using functions as variables and using data structures with immutable
state.  If you've never done this before you can safely skip this chapter, but
I'd encourage you to try it anyway and broaden your horizons!

Vimscript has all the pieces necessary to program in a kind-of-functional style,
but it's a bit clunky.  We can create a few helpers that will make it less
painful though.

Go ahead and create a `functional.vim` file somewhere so you don't have to keep
typing everything over and over.  This file will be our scratchpad for this
chapter.

[functional programming]: https://secure.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/wiki/Functional_programming

Immutable Data Structures
-------------------------

Unfortunately Vim doesn't have any immutable collections like Clojure's vectors
and maps built-in, but by creating some helper functions we can fake it to some
degree.

Add the following function to your file:

    :::vim
    function! Sorted(l)
        let new_list = deepcopy(a:l)
        call sort(new_list)
        return new_list
    endfunction

Source and write the file, then run `:echo Sorted([3, 2, 4, 1])` to try it out.
Vim echoes `[1, 2, 3, 4]`.

How is this different from simply calling the built-in `sort()` function?  The
key is the first line: `let new_list = deepcopy(a:l)`.  Vim's `sort()` sorts the
list *in place*, so we first create a full copy of the list and sort *that* so
the original list won't be changed.

This prevents side effects and helps us write code that is easier to reason
about and test.  Let's add a few more helper functions in this same style:

    :::vim
    function! Reversed(l)
        let new_list = deepcopy(a:l)
        call reverse(new_list)
        return new_list
    endfunction

    function! Append(l, val)
        let new_list = deepcopy(a:l)
        call add(new_list, a:val)
        return new_list
    endfunction

    function! Assoc(l, i, val)
        let new_list = deepcopy(a:l)
        let new_list[a:i] = a:val
        return new_list
    endfunction

    function! Pop(l, i)
        let new_list = deepcopy(a:l)
        call remove(new_list, a:i)
        return new_list
    endfunction

Each of these functions is exactly the same except for the middle line and the
arguments they take.  Source and write the file and try them out on a few lists.

`Reversed()` takes a list and returns a new list with the elements reversed.

`Append()` returns a new list with the given value appended to the end of the
old one.

`Assoc()` (short for "associate") returns a new list, with the element at the
given index replaced by the new value.

`Pop()` returns a new list with the element at the given index removed.

Functions as Variables
----------------------

Vimscript supports using variables to store functions, but the syntax is a bit
obtuse.  Run the following commands:

    :::vim
    :let Myfunc = function("Append")
    :echo Myfunc([1, 2], 3)

Vim will display `[1, 2, 3]` as expected.  Notice that the variable we used
started with a capital letter.  If a Vimscript variable refers to a function it
must start with a capital letter.

Functions can be stored in lists just like any other kind of variable.  Run the
following commands:

    :::vim
    :let funcs = [function("Append"), function("Pop")]
    :echo funcs[1](['a', 'b', 'c'], 1)

Vim displays `['a', 'c']`.  The `funcs` variable does *not* need to start with
a capital letter because it's storing a list, not a function.  The contents of
the list don't matter at all.

Higher-Order Functions
----------------------

Let's create a few of the most commonly-used higher-order functions.  If you're
not familiar with that term, higher-order functions are functions that take
*other* functions and do something with them.

We'll begin with the trusty `map` function.  Add this to your file:

    :::vim
    function! Mapped(fn, l)
        let new_list = deepcopy(a:l)
        call map(new_list, string(a:fn) . '(v:val)')
        return new_list
    endfunction

Source and write the file, and try it out by running the following commands:

    :::vim
    :let mylist = [[1, 2], [3, 4]]
    :echo Mapped(function("Reversed"), mylist)

Vim displays `[[2, 1], [4, 3]]`, which is the result of applying `Reversed()` to
every element in the list.

How does `Mapped()` work?  Once again we create a fresh list with `deepcopy()`,
do something to it, and return the modified copy -- nothing new there.  The
tricky part is the middle.

`Mapped()` takes two arguments: a funcref (Vim's term for "variable holding
a function") and a list.  We use the built-in `map()` function to perform the
actual work.  Read `:help map()` now to see how it works.

Now we'll create a few other common higher-order functions.  Add the following
to your file:

    :::vim
    function! Filtered(fn, l)
        let new_list = deepcopy(a:l)
        call filter(new_list, string(a:fn) . '(v:val)')
        return new_list
    endfunction

Try `Filtered()` out with the following commands:

    :::vim
    :let mylist = [[1, 2], [], ['foo'], []]
    :echo Filtered(function('len'), mylist)

Vim displays `[[1, 2], ['foo']]`.

`Filtered()` takes a predicate function and a list.  It returns a copy of the
list that contains only the elements of the original where the result of calling
the function on it is "truthy".  In this case we use the built-in `len()`
function, so it filters out all the elements whose length is zero.

Finally we'll create the counterpart to `Filtered()`:

    :::vim
    function! Removed(fn, l)
        let new_list = deepcopy(a:l)
        call filter(new_list, '!' . string(a:fn) . '(v:val)')
        return new_list
    endfunction

Try it out just like we did with `Filtered()`:

    :::vim
    :let mylist = [[1, 2], [], ['foo'], []]
    :echo Removed(function('len'), mylist)

Vim displays `[[], []]`.  `Removed()` is like `Filtered()` except it only keeps
elements where the predicate function does *not* return something truthy.

The only difference in the code is the single `'!' . ` we added to the call
command, which negates the result of the predicate.

Performance
-----------

You might be thinking that copying lists all over the place is wasteful, since
Vim has to constantly create new copies and garbage collect old ones.

If so: you're right!  Vim's lists don't support the same kind of structural
sharing as Clojure's vectors, so all those copy operations can be expensive.

Sometimes this will matter.  If you're working with enormous lists, things can
slow down.  In real life, though, you might be surprised at how little you'll
actually notice the difference.

Consider this: as I'm writing this chapter my Vim program is using about 80
megabytes of memory (and I have a *lot* of plugins installed).  My laptop has
8 *gigabytes* of memory in it.  Is the overhead of having a few copies of a list
around really going to make a noticeable difference?  Of course that depends on
the size of the list, but in most cases the answer will be "no".

To contrast, my Firefox instance with five tabs open is currently using 1.22
*gigabytes* of RAM.

You'll need to use your own judgement about when this style of programming
creates unacceptably bad performance.

Exercises
---------

Read `:help sort()`.

Read `:help reverse()`.

Read `:help copy()`.

Read `:help deepcopy()`.

Read `:help map()` if you haven't already.

Read `:help function()`.

Modify `Assoc()`, `Pop()`, `Mapped()`, `Filtered()` and `Removed()` to support
dictionaries.  You'll probably need `:help type()` for this.

Implement `Reduced()`.

Pour yourself a glass of your favorite drink.  This chapter was intense!
